Explaining machine learning to Granny

Many a times we find difficult explaining  artificial intelligence to older generation or find articles that are too high to understand.I will try and explain 
Machine learning and deep learning with real life examples. 


What is artificial intelligence?
Artificial Intelligence involves teaching a machine to do tasks. Its just the same as how we teach a baby to say “Mom” , “Dad” or to stand and walk or differentiate 
between colours etc. We human have a complex and a wonderful organ which is the brain. It has a dense biological neural network. This network helps us to take decision,
classify a bunch of objects based on colour ,texture shape etc. Similarly to make machines smart, it has artificial neural network , which needs to be taught, trained 
inorder to make desicion or predict future. 

What are some examples of AI?
A popular example would auatonomous car that would drive the passenger to its destination without a driver.Predicting emotions and mood of a person, separating out spam emails etc


Here are some basic definition of Artificial learning,Machine Learning and Deep Learning
1.Artifical intelligence(AI) involves making machines smart. It enables computer/machine to mimic human behavior. These machine could be a car, fridge etc.

2.Machine Learning (ML) is a subset of AI. It  refers to systems that can learn by themselves without being explicitl to do so.

3.Deep Learning(DL) is a subset of ML which is similar to ML but has dense neural network. An example would be google translate. It’s a an application which 
can translate whatever you speak or type into any language.
Lets look ML in detail.


Machine Learnng
Machine learning model identify patterns and predict outcomes based on the input dataset.Huge data  related to customers, business operations, or financials are 
collected to train a model.
some application of ML are online fraud detection,product recommendation,traffic prediction etc
 
Just like there are various styles to teach a child, ML has three model/style of learning.

1.Supervised Learning: To teach a child to differentiate and recognise the colour red from blue, the teacher would show a red car, red pen, red ball. 
And to teach the child to recognize the colour blue ,she would show blue car,blue pen, blue ball. This is the learning phase. To check if the child has  
understood to differentiate between red and blue colour, the teacher shows a red box and asks the child to name the colour of it. If the child says blue then the 
teacher teaches the child again with more examples. Testing gives feedback. In terms of machine, the user would give data (eg different shape objects) and 
label(eg colours) for the machine to learn. We then  test the machine for accuracy and  feedback.
Techniques under supervised learning
A.	Regression: An example of regression is predicting price of a 3BHK.
B.	Classification: An example of classification is classifying a dot as either red dot or blue dot 

2.Unsupervised Learning: suppose a student hasn’t attended a single linear algebra lecture. Before the exam, he is provided with notes and decides to 
study that chapter on his own. Looking at all the solved examples , he notes a pattern in the solution. Since he decides to do self study, there’s no feedback.
For exam, he solves the problem with the same pattern . in terms of ML, the machine is provided with unlabeled, uncategorised data and machine on its own learns 
and find similarity between the data.
Techiques under unsupervised learning 
A.	Clustering :  grouping similar things together. if you present various news articles to a human, it groups the articles into sports new, business, 
entertainment etc
B.	Association: when you go to a cothing store for the sole purpose of only buying a kurta but the shopkeeper suggests various matching leggings that would go 
along with it.

3.Reinforcement Learning: If a child completes his homework he is rewarded with chocolate If he doesn’t complete his homework, he doesn’t get a chocolate. 
Over time he learns that only if he completes his homework , he gets a chocolate.
Deep Learning
When DL is  applied to a machine it allows the network to learn without human supervision from unstructured data (data that isn’t classified or labeled).  
The difference between ML and DL is that DL has a dense artificial neural network.


Analogy between biological neuron and artificial neuron
Neuron are fundamental basic unit of neural networks.Natural neurons have  four basic components. These components are known by their biological names - 
dendrites, soma, axon, and synapses. Dendrites are hair-like extensions of the soma which act like input channels. These input channels receive their input 
through the synapses of other neurons. The soma then processes these incoming signals over time. The soma then turns that processed value into an output which 
is sent out to other neurons through the axon and the synapses. Artificial neuron have some basic component.
1.Input nodes: each node has a numeric value. In terms of image it could be a number associated with a colour.
2.Connections-a path that departs from the input nodes has a weight (w) associated with it and this can be any real number. The ANN runs and propagates 
millions of times to optimize these “w” values. The weights are changed to get accurate result. This is similar to buying a t-shirt from an online site. 
If you order a large size tshirt and it turns out to be loose , the next time you purchase a small size tshirt to fit you properly. 
3.Each input node value and weight is multiplied and added together .They are used as inputs for a weighted sum.
4.This result will be the input for a transfer or activation function. Just like how we feel the pain of a pinch, when we exceed our threshold capacity 
to endure this pain, the artificial neuron will also only fire when the sum of the inputs exceeds a threshold. This is how the activation function works. 
5.As a result, you have the output node, which is associated with the function of the weighted sum of the input nodes.

Convolutional neural networks (CNN): These are used for image/video processing or computer vision applications. CNNs are deep artificial neural networks that 
are used primarily to classify images (e.g. label what they see), cluster them by similarity (photo search), and perform object recognition within scenes.
To train the machine using CNN to differentiate between a dog and cat image, we give thousands of images of dogs and cats with  pre-defined labels(i.e dog and cat). 
The model first makes a forward pass i.e takes all the sliced pieces of images and calculates the initial weights, makes a prediction of the outcome label 
(i.e. this is a dog) and compares it with the predefined label that is the existing training set labels. Because this is a training set we already know the 
outcome labels thus depending on the success of the prediction, a loss function which is difference between the actual and predicted value is calculated and the 
network goes backward to update its weight.The way the computer is able to adjust its weights to decrease the error is through a method called back propagation. 
Now the model performs a backward pass through the network, which is determining which weights contributed most to the error and finding ways to fine tune these 
weights so that the loss decreases thru consecutive passes. The above is the training phase. The error or the loss function reduces with training.
We then test the model with a new image of a cat to see if its able to identify it correctly. This is the testing phase.

Recursive (Recurrent) Neural Networks (RNN):  here the model predicts the output more accurately with the help of the  knowledge of the previous input history. 
For example when a child starts to go to church every Sunday , he starts to predict the prayers said by the priest by the third Sunday.


Natural Language Processing (NLP)
It’s the ability of a machine to understand human language and process it for various application. It has ability to convert human speech into text, run chatbots. 
A popular example would be Siri, Alexa etc



